Ethical hearts post (#98)
octopusthink/octopusthink.com: src/content/blog/2019-11-22-ethics-at-the-heart-of-business.mdx

---
authors: [sarah]
tags: [ethics]
title: Making ethics the beating heart(s) of our business
summary: Saying you're all about ethics is one thing, but actually quantifying it and holding yourself accountable is another thing entirely. Let's get specific about what "ethical business practices" actually means.
updated: 2019-11-22
---
import { VisuallyHidden } from '@octopusthink/nautilus';

import DecorativeImage from 'components/DecorativeImage';
import Panel from 'components/Panel';

> One sunny morning earlier this year, Matt and I made a giant pot of Chemex and conducted a series of exercises to determine our brand. Covering our newly-tiled kitchen walls with post-it notes helped us better understand our shared values, priorities, and motivators. A theme that kept coming up was ethics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One sunny morning earlier this year, Matt and I made a giant pot of Chemex and conducted a series of exercises to determine our brand. Covering our newly-tiled kitchen walls with post-it notes helped us better understand our shared values, priorities, and motivations. A theme that kept coming up was ethics.
```

I dunno, I find "motivators" a weird word 🤷‍♂

Author: "Motivations" isn't technically correct here though. We could compromise on "drivers"?
```suggestion
One sunny morning earlier this year, Matt and I made a giant pot of Chemex and conducted a series of exercises to determine our brand. Covering our newly-tiled kitchen walls with post-it notes helped us better understand our shared values, priorities, and drivers. A theme that kept coming up was ethics.
```

Reviewer: Leave it as-is then—motivators is fine!

> We've both spent a long time working for big tech companies and watching as technology becomes more interwoven in people's everyday lives. Many of these changes are improvements for the better, but others have the potential to create harm. The tech industry often gets so excited about what we *can* do that we sometimes don't stop to ask ourselves if we *should* do it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've both spent a long time working for big tech companies, watching technology become more interwoven in people's everyday lives. Many of these changes are improvements for the better, but others have the potential to create harm. The tech industry often gets so excited about what we *can* do that we sometimes don't stop to ask ourselves if we *should* do it.
```

We want to make the tech industry a more diverse and ethical place. We genuinely believe that **technology is a tool to improve people's lives**, and that it's more and more important that we wield it carefully, thoughtfully, and deliberately.

> It's all well and good saying we care about ethics, or signing whatever pledge might be making the rounds this week, or putting a #TechForGood hashtag on all our tweets. But if we don't back that up with a clear and concrete declaration of what that actually means in practise, it's just *ethics-washing*. (I made that up right now. Feel free to use it.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's all well and good saying we care about ethics, or signing whatever pledge might be making the rounds this week, or putting a _#TechForGood_ hashtag on all our tweets. But if we don't back that up with a clear and concrete declaration of what that actually means in practise, it's just *ethics-washing*. (I made that up right now. Feel free to use it.)
```

I think emphasising that _somehow_ makes it better. It's weird for it just to be regular text, to my eyes.

Author: OMG italics definitely makes it worse. I'd prefer the code style to italics, but I prefer it un-emphasised. Would compromise back to code, I suppose.

Reviewer: I liked code, I figured you removed it for styling reasons? I like the code.

Author: I did, because code looks awkward. (The x-height is different.) But I could fix the styling at some point so it looks better. I just don't think it needs to be highlighted in any way because that's just how hashtags work on the web (ie, they use the same type styling but are often links). I guess we could make it a link, but I'm okay with compromising on the code styling if that makes you happy!

When we think of sustainability, we think of both **environmental and economic resilience**. This widens our scope and allows us to think more broadly about how our business impacts the world we all inhabit.  How are our individual choices, on both a personal and a profession level, impacting the world at large? Are we following campground rules?

In practise, this means we’ve built a sustainable business model based on controlled and deliberate growth. We pay our taxes. Our primary responsibility is to our customers, not shareholders. We don't take work with Halliburton, Goldman Sachs, or Enron (not that they're offering).

We consider the environmental impact of our work. We're evaluating options for greener hosting and our VPS uses renewable energy. We build sites to be as performant as possible (this site loads in about one second!). We have a printer, but we don't use it all that much. We don't commute anywhere (or even own a car) and our home office uses 100% renewable energy. (It may or may not help that we live in the windiest country in Europe. 🏴󠁧󠁢󠁳󠁣󠁴󠁿)

## How these hearts define our business

> **Everything we do is derived from these three pillars.** Our values, brand, and design principles (more on all of these later) all tie back to our ethics. Every decision we make—whether to include a popup here, which analytics package to use, or whether to pursue a new contract—is assessed through these lenses. Ethics aren't the *only* metrics by which we make our decisions, but they're a hugely important component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Everything we do is derived from these three pillars.** Our values, brand, and design principles (more on all of these later) all tie back to our ethics. Every decision we make—whether to include a pop-up here, which analytics package to use, or whether to pursue a new contract—is assessed through these lenses. Ethics aren't the *only* metrics by which we make our decisions, but they're a hugely important component.
```

> The tricky thing about ethics—and being public about those ethics—is that there's always a risk you'll get it wrong. Getting a *fact* wrong in public is one thing, but getting your *ethics* wrong is a whole other thing entirely. Reputations have been made and ruined (mostly ruined) by a misguided tweet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tricky thing about ethics—and being public about those ethics—is that you'll get it wrong. Getting a *fact* wrong in public is one thing, but getting your *ethics* wrong is a whole other thing entirely. Reputations have been made and ruined by a misguided tweet.
```

"is that there's" is so wordy to me. 🤷‍♂

Author: This then reads "The tricky thing about ethics ... is that you'll get it wrong" which obviously isn't what we're trying to say. What about:

```suggestion
The tricky thing about ethics—and being public about those ethics—is there's a risk you might get it wrong. Getting a *fact* wrong in public is one thing, but getting your *ethics* wrong is a whole other thing entirely. Reputations have been made and ruined (mostly ruined) by a misguided tweet.
```

Reviewer: Much nicer; committed! 👍
